OK, now it's time to learn about another construct that is extremely common and useful in programming,
and that is loops, so loops are blocks of code that can be repeated a number of times, depending on
some criteria, they can be repeated based on a number.
Like you can say, I want this loop, this block of code to be repeated x number of times five number
five times ten times one million times.
Or you can specify that a block of code should be repeated as long as something is true or while something
is true or until something becomes true or whatever.
So you've got a few ways to control how many times a loop will execute.
Now there are a couple of types of loops, and we're going to take a look at all of them.
So let's let's jump into the code.
Now what we're going to do here, we're going to revisit our number guessing game.
We're going to rewrite that.
But this time we're going to make it so that it allows us to actually enter a number that we guess on
a command prompt.
We can actually get prompted to enter a number and then we will enter a number to guess whatever the
randomly chosen number was and see if we got it or not.
And eventually we will modify the program so that it will keep asking us to enter a number until we
finally guess the correct number.
All right.
So first, let's let's re implement some of our guessing game here.
I think we're going to have a couple of variables will have a variable that represents the random number.
So let's create an integer to hold a random number.
And let's go ahead and generate that random number, and I'm going to use the random class.
So new random.
That next event, and we're and let's discuss the number between one and 10 inclusively, which means
it could include the one and it could include the 10.
So then we will give it an amount of 10.
However, if you recall, now what this means is zero will be included in this.
But 10 will not be included.
So this will actually give us random numbers between zero and nine inclusive.
We want numbers between one and 10.
So what we can do since this will give us zero through nine, we can simply add one to this.
And now we will be getting random numbers stored in the random number between one and 10.
And if you ever forget how this works, you can always look at the Java Dock there.
If I just hover over this, in fact, there's the Java Dock right there and it tells us right here uniformly
distributed into values between zero inclusive and the specified value exclusive meaning not including
the upper limit.
OK.
So there's our randomly generated number.
Now we want to prompt the user to enter a guest number, right?
Like what number do they guess?
And I think we looked at this early on.
Forgive me, it's been a long time myself since I think we did this.
So we used a method called console on the system class.
What we can do is we can call system, not console.
And this console method returns an object that kind of represents the computer system, the keyboard
in the monitor, if you want to think of it in this way.
So the console method returns that object, they console object, and then that console object has a
number of useful methods on it.
The method that I think we will want here will be the Red Line method.
This will allow us to read some input from the keyboard.
OK.
And we can also present the user with a prompt along with this message, so we can say something like,
please guess a number between one and 10 inclusively.
OK.
Now, this method read line, if we hover over it, we can see that it returns a string, which will
be whatever it is that we entered.
So in this case where we're being prompted to enter a number, but it's going to return a string and
obviously ultimately we're going to want to compare the number that was entered with the number that
was guessed.
In this case, the number that is guessed is an integer, but the number that will be entered is going
to be a string.
So I think it would be best if we were to convert this entered string into a number.
Do you remember how to do that?
So so let's keep that in mind.
So first, let's go ahead and just capture this string into a variable so you could either put your
cursor at the end of the line and then do a command option V to introduce a variable just like that.
And we could call it guest name or whatever you want to call it, or number or entered name or whatever.
Or obviously, you also could just type that in yourself, string guest numb either way.
All right.
So just keep in mind, this guest numb variable will contain the number that the user enters from the
keyboard.
All right.
So now we've got this guest number, but it's a string.
And we're going to want to compare this guest number in the random number, but we cannot compare an
integer and a string, so we need to convert this guest number into an integer.
And so what I think I would do is I like this name for the variable already guest numb, but I'm already
using it for this string.
So what I think I'm inclined to do here is to just put a postfix on the end of this variable to indicate
that this is the guest number as a string.
And then I'll introduce an integer and I will use the word guess the number for that variable instead,
because that really will be a number.
So let me show you what I mean here.
Guest stars or string or or text or something like that, then I will introduce another variable and
and I will call this one guest numb.
Equals and now we want to convert this string representation of a number into an actual integer and
remember how to do that.
I told you once you learned how to do this, you'd probably encounter it a lot.
All right.
So we'll use integer pass int and then we'll pass in the guest.
No text just like that.
And now we have just converted the text number that was input into an integer.
All right.
Now we can compare the guest num number to the random number, and we'll use an if statement to do that.
Well, OK, so we can do if the guest number.
Equals.
Be careful to make sure you use the equals operator and not the assignment operator assignment operator
as this one equals, whereas the equals operator is two equals two equals allows us to compare whether
or not two things are equal, whereas the assignment operator assigns a value to a variable.
OK.
All right.
If guest, none equals random, numb.
Just like that.
Then then let's print a message out and say, you know, the random number was blah blah blah, and
you got it right.
So for that, we'll use a formatted system that out that format or print off.
So we'll use an ASO Yusef.
OK, let's see.
So we can say the random number was percent de.
Period.
You got it.
Exclamation and will probably want a new line here.
Also, comma.
And then we'll pass in the random numbers so that we can see it right.
That way, we get a little bit of feedback.
Now what if you didn't get it?
What if these two are not equal?
Well, we'll want to give ourselves some feedback for that as well.
So then we can say else or otherwise right else.
So you f.
The random number was percent the period.
You didn't get.
It.
And we'll still pass in India, the random number there.
All right, so we haven't implemented any looping yet.
Let's just try this out and see what happens now.
If you may recall, from the last time we used the system that console, you may recall that if we just
try to run this the way that we normally run our Java applications and programs, we're going to get
a failure.
In fact, they'll just show you that again.
And the reason we'll get a failure is because.
All right.
So yeah, here's our here's our failure.
And the reason we're getting this failure is because when we run a program that is requesting access
to the console from directly within the IED, the IED is not capable of accessing this console.
That's just because of the way that the IED is working with the system.
So if we want to run a program that accesses the console, we have to run it manually ourselves from
from the command line.
OK.
And so, first of all, want to open up a command prompt within the idea?
We can do it in the IED, but we'll be taking control of actually executing Java.
All right.
So the way we can do that is with option F12 or Alt F12 on Windows in Linux, and that opens a command
prompt.
Now we are by default inside of the same folder where our code lives.
OK.
And now to execute this program, we can type Java All Lowercase Space Hyphen C four class path because
we have to tell Java the the the folder where our compiled that is our built program.
Guess it lives.
Keep in mind that every time we run one of these programs, what's actually happening is that Java is
translating our Java code into what is called Byte code, which is essentially machine code, if you
will write zeros and ones ultimately.
And so when we use the Java command to actually execute a Java program, we actually are pointing it
at the final bytecode version of the program that Java built for us.
And so we have to tell it where that is.
Now that file, if I open up the project window or the project pane here, the compiled program is in
the out folder under our project folder.
Okay, so that we've got the project folder here and then we've got in a folder called out.
And if you happen to be writing your code in a project that isn't called people, that's fine.
It doesn't matter as long as you're following along and you've got this out folder in whatever project
folder you're in, you're fine.
All right.
So if we expand open this out folder, we will see a little structure here like production, and then
you'll probably see whatever the name of the project is that you're writing all of this code in and
the name of our class is called guess it.
And so there should be a file in this in here called Guess it.
And that's the one we want to refer to using this path.
So the way I will do this is copy.
Space out, because that's the top folder here within the project folder, out forward, well, slash.
Now on Mac and Linux, that would be a forward slash on Windows.
It will likely be a backslash, so be careful about the forward versus backslash C.P space out forward
slash production and I'm going to hit tab on Mac and Linux.
This will usually work if you happen to be using PowerShell in Windows, you can probably use the tab
as well.
And I don't recall if that works for the default command prompt in Windows, so you may have to type
that out explicitly and then people.
And that puts me in the folder where all of the compiled Java files are.
And then I can do a space and then I give it the name of the file I want to run, which in this case
is, guess it.
Guess it just like that.
All right.
So now, if I hit return, I can run the program.
All right, cool.
So it prompts me, please guess, a number between one and 10 inclusively, so I'm going to guess five.
And hit return.
All right, the random number was four.
You didn't get it.
Oh, and it looks like if you notice I got this weird little symbol here, and that's because I forgot
to add a new line character at the end of the you didn't get it message.
So right here, I'm going to put my cursor there and I'm going to give myself a new line character with
a percent in just like that.
Now that I've made a change to the code, I need to re compile this program explicitly.
Normally, we don't need to do that and I've explained this before, but I'll explain it again.
Normally we don't need to explicitly compile anything because normally we run the programs from within
the idea completely instead of outside here manually.
And when we run the programs within the ADP, the ADP knows to go ahead and compile or recompile the
code if we've made any changes.
But if we make changes to the code and then we run the program again from the command prompt here in
a manual way, the idea will not have been triggered to re compile the code.
And so now we have to re compile the code ourselves.
So put your cursor anywhere in the editor window here and then you'll do a command F9 or control F9
on Windows and Linux to recompile or build the project.
When when we're building the project, that's what we mean is that it's being recompiled.
Really, the only difference between building and compiling is that in this case, we are compiling
just one file.
But many real Java programs are comprised of multiple files, and if multiple files need to be re compiled,
that is what is referred to as building the project.
So it really means is going through the whole project, finding all of the individual files that need
to be compiled and then re compiling all of them.
All right.
So now we've compiled this.
So then if we put our cursor back down here in the terminal prompt for Windows users, you may be able
to press the up arrow to recall the last command that you entered for Mac and Linux users.
You definitely can do this for Windows users if that does not work.
Sorry, you'll have to retype this command out explicitly.
All right, so after you've re-entered the command, then we can rerun it again, and I'm going to guess
another another number, I'm going to guess three.
OK, this time it was one, and I still didn't get it, so now if I want to keep running this, I can
click the up arrow, I can press the up arrow and hit Enter and then I can run this again.
Now it was nine.
I can and I can keep doing that.
All right, but you see how much of a pain in the behind that is?
Wouldn't it be nice if it would just keep looping until I finally get the number?
That's what we want to do.
So.
To do that, first off, I'm going to close this project, Payne, to give myself a little more space.
OK, so we pretty much just want to keep repeating this block of code that I have selected over and
over again.
And that brings us to the first type of loop we're going to learn about, which is called a while loop.
And what we can do is we can tell in a while loop while something is in a certain state.
Loop through this code.
OK.
So let me show you what I mean by that.
Now there's a couple of ways that we can introduce this while loop.
One nice way that we could do it is to literally select all of this could be careful.
If you do it this way, though, you don't want to select this curly brace that I have on Line 14 because
that curly brace goes with the whole entire method, and we're just wanting to loop the code inside
of the method, the actual body here.
But if you select all of that code, you can do an option command T, and that allows us to surround
the selected code with some construct.
And you've got a lot of options here if if else, while do while for try catch a lot of things.
So what we want is to surround the selected code with a while loop and I will select that and watch
what happens.
OK, so it just surrounded all of that code with a while loop.
Now notice the while loop looks kind of similar to the if statement in that there's immediately after
the word while we have parentheses and then a boolean here.
Now here, the I.D. has by default hardcoded a true Boolean here.
And what this is saying is that as long as we have a true here, which in this case, it's hard coded,
so it'll always be there unless we change the code as long as this is true.
Keep looping through this code just like so.
So let's see what that looks like now.
In order to run this again, we'll have to re compile manually so that we can run it down here.
So I'm going to do another command, F9 to build the project.
OK.
And then I'm going to put my cursor down here in the terminal.
I'm going to hit the upper key and rerun this.
All right.
Guess a number between one and 10?
I'm going to guess three.
I didn't get it, it was a seven.
And now look what it's doing, it immediately prompted me to guess the number again.
I'm going to guess a six.
This time it was a four.
OK, so this is a little better now, I don't have to keep restarting the program every time I want
to guess something.
However, do you see there's one annoyance with the way this is working currently, and that is, each
time I miss the number, it changes the number right, so I don't get multiple chances to guess at the
same number.
It's a moving target every time.
That's not normally the way a guessing game works.
Normally, the guessing game will pick a number and then you get a few tries to get it right.
But in this case, everything in here is getting looped, including the generation of the random number.
That's probably not really what we want.
We probably want to generate a random number and then get lots of loops to try to guess what that number
was.
So let's exit out of this program now to exit out.
We can use as long as you click down here in the terminal.
You can do a control C to break out of the program.
Break out of that loop.
OK to cancel the program.
All right now up here, the easiest thing we can do to make this program a little bit better is to take
this line where we're guessing the random, where we're generating the random number and just move it
above the loop right outside of the loop.
So that way will generate the number once, but then we can keep looping over the parts where we guess
the number, right?
So to do that, I'm going to just put my cursor on line seven here and then I'm going to use option
shift up arrow just like that to move that line up.
And on Windows and Linux, that would be an alt shift up arrow.
And then let me also fix the indentation with a shift tab.
Did you notice like it was?
This line had the same indentation as when it was inside of the while loop.
And now that it's outside of the wire loop, we wouldn't want that to be indented anymore.
We'd want it on the same level with the while loop.
Does that make sense?
And the reason for that is this indentation gives us a nice visual indication that all of this code
here that's indented is inside of the while loop, meaning this is what's going to be repeated multiple
times, right?
So we would not want code that is outside of the while loop, such as Line six to be indented.
That just looks kind of weird.
It should be on the same level as the while loop.
All right.
So now let's rebuild the project again.
Command F9 or control f nine, OK, and then put our cursor down here in the terminal and rerun our
program again again using up arrow and return.
All right, so now let's see, I'm going to guess five.
No, the random number was one.
You didn't get it.
All right.
So now I know what the next number is.
It's one.
Hey, you got it.
Now look what's happening.
Couple of things now that we can keep repeating this, we probably want to fix a couple of things.
One thing that's kind of weird is when you don't get the number correct.
Maybe we shouldn't be telling ourselves what the actual number was, right?
Because that defeats the whole point of the guessing game.
Now that it's easy to keep guessing until you get it, we probably don't want to be showing what the
actual number is so we can come up here and take this bit out where we're showing what that number actually
is.
Let's remove that and then we don't need this either.
Now, technically, because we're not, we're no longer showing a value, a dynamic value here.
Technically, we don't need this to continue being a print statement and we could just use the print
line or something like that.
But I'm lazy and I'm on to leave it.
All right.
The other thing you may have noticed is that when we did get it correct, as soon as we did enter the
correct number, it's still prompted us inside of the loop.
So that loop kept keeps running, even when we do guess the correct number.
We probably don't want that either.
So that's up here when we do get the number correct.
It prints out that we got it.
But then what happens is the code just loops back up to the top again and we keep going through this
loop.
There's no way to get out of it.
So one way that we can break out of this loop is actually to just break out of the entire method.
In other words, to just stop the program from running.
Now we're in this main method here, and any time you're in a method, if you want to get out of that
method, you can use the keyword return.
You don't even have to return anything.
You can just use the word return and that will get you out of a method.
So what we could do online 11 here is make a new line.
And then just say return with a semicolon, so you haven't seen us do that before.
Normally we're returning a value like a five or something like that, but in this case, we can simply
just use return with nothing at all.
And so that actually gets us out of this main method, which in turn causes the entire program to stop
running.
OK, so notice now we're only doing that if we guessed the correct number, if we didn't guess the correct
number, then we're going to just keep going through this loop indefinitely because we've got the word
true hardcoded in this loop.
OK, so let's try that now.
So let's rebuild with Command F nine or control f nine.
OK, then put our cursor down here in the terminal.
Oh, now I forgot to cancel out of the previous program that we ran out of the previous loop.
So we'll want to cancel out of this with the control C.
All right, there we go.
And now we can rerun the program by using the up arrow to recall the last command and then rerun it.
All right.
So please enter a number.
I'm going to enter.
Five.
Oh, and I got it on the first try.
Woodson, wouldn't you know it?
Now that's cool, though, because I got it on the first try and now you see that we the program ended.
Right?
So that part worked.
So let's do this a couple more times, though, and see, by the way, on Mac and Linux.
If you want to clear the terminal here just to make it a little neater, you can type the word clear.
All right.
And now I will recall.
Now I will recall the Java statement, the Java command to run the program again.
Now, since I typed clear, I need to hit the up arrow a couple of times to get back to that Java command
and then I can hit return.
All right.
Please get the number between one and 10 again.
I will pick five.
All right.
So I didn't get it, and now I don't know what the number is, so I have to keep guessing.
Now I will guess three.
I still didn't get it.
Now I will guess one.
Hey, I got it, so I got it in three tries.
OK, so now you're beginning to see how useful these loops can be.
So in the next lesson, we will play around with some of the things that we can do in this loop to control
it more like what if we want to stop the loop prematurely?
Right?
We can allow ourselves to do that.
So we'll do that in the next lesson, and I'll see you then.